Incorporate DSL2 features into docs (#3793)
nextflow-io/nextflow: docs/dsl1.rst

.. _dsl1-page:

********************
Migrating from DSL 1
********************

In Nextflow version ``22.03.0-edge``, DSL2 became the default DSL version. In version ``22.12.0-edge``,

> DSL1 support was removed, and this documentation was updated to use DSL2 by default. Users who are still

Reviewer: ```suggestion
DSL1 support was removed, and the Nextflow documentation was updated to use DSL2 by default. Users who are still
```

describes the differences between DSL1 and DSL2, and how to migrate to DSL2.

In Nextflow versions prior to ``22.03.0-edge``, you must enable DSL2 explicitly in order to use it. You can either
set the feature flag in your pipeline script::

    nextflow.enable.dsl=2

Or set the environment variable where you launch Nextflow::

    export NXF_DEFAULT_DSL=2

Processes and workflows
=======================

In DSL1, a process definition is also the process invocation. Process inputs and outputs are connected to channels
using ``from`` and ``into``. Here is the :ref:`getstarted-first` example written in DSL1::

    nextflow.enable.dsl=1

    params.str = 'Hello world!'

    process splitLetters {

        output:
        file 'chunk_*' into letters

        """
        printf '${params.str}' | split -b 6 - chunk_
        """
    }

    process convertToUpper {

        input:
        file x from letters.flatten()

        output:
        stdout result

        """
        cat $x | tr '[a-z]' '[A-Z]'
        """
    }

    result.view { it.trim() }

To migrate this code to DSL2, you need to move all of your channel logic throughout the script

> into a (nameless) ``workflow`` definition. Additionally, you must call each process explicitly,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
into a ``workflow`` definition. Additionally, you must call each process explicitly,
```

passing any input channels as arguments (instead of ``from ...``) and receiving any output channels
as return values (instead of ``into ...``).

Refer to the :ref:`workflow-page` page to learn how to define a workflow, as well as the original

> :ref:`getstarted-first` example to see the resulting DSL2 version.

Reviewer: Is it worth pasting it here as well? It'll be duplicated, but would be much easier to compare the two directly. Also it's likely that the getting-started example may slowly drift from this one.

Channel forking
===============

In DSL1, a channel can be used as an input only once; to use a channel multiple times, the channel must
be forked using the ``into`` operator.

In DSL2, channels are automatically forked when connecting two or more consumers.

> For example::

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, this would not work in DSL1 but is not a problem in DSL2::
```

reuse of pipeline components.

DSL2 introduces the concept of "module scripts" (or "modules" for short), which are Nextflow scripts
that can be "included" by other scripts. While modules are not essential to migrating to DSL2, nor are
they mandatory in DSL2 by any means, modules can help you organize a large pipeline into multiple smaller
files, and take advantage of modules created by others. Check out the :ref:`module-page` to get started.

Deprecations
============

Processes
---------

* The ``set`` process input type is no longer supported, use :ref:`tuple <process-input-tuple>` instead.
* The ``set`` process output type is no longer supported, use :ref:`tuple <process-out-tuple>` instead.
* The ``mode flatten`` option for process outputs is no longer available. Use the :ref:`operator-flatten` operator on the corresponding output channel instead.

* Unqualified value and file elements in a tuple declaration are no longer allowed. Use an explicit
  ``val`` or ``path`` qualifier.
  
  For example::

    process foo {
        input:
        tuple X, 'some-file.sam'
        output:
        tuple X, 'some-file.bam'

        script:

>         '''

Reviewer: I think that these need to be double quotes for this example to work, no?

Author: You are right, thanks

    process foo {
        input:
        tuple val(X), path('some-file.sam')
        output:
        tuple val(X), path('some-file.bam')

        script:
        '''
        your_command --in $X some-file.sam > some-file.bam
        '''
    }

Channels
--------

* Channel method ``bind`` has been deprecated in DSL2.
* Channel method ``<<`` has been deprecated in DSL2.
* Channel factory ``create`` has been deprecated in DSL2.

Operators
---------

* Operator ``choice`` has been deprecated in DSL2. Use :ref:`operator-branch` instead.
* Operator ``close`` has been deprecated in DSL2.
* Operator ``countBy`` has been deprecated in DSL2.
* Operator ``into`` has been deprecated in DSL2, as it is no longer needed.
* Operator ``fork`` has been renamed to :ref:`operator-multimap`.
* Operator ``groupBy`` has been deprecated in DSL2. Use :ref:`operator-grouptuple` instead.
* Operators ``print`` and ``println`` have been deprecated in DSL2. Use :ref:`operator-view` instead.
* Operator ``route`` has been deprecated in DSL2.
* Operator ``separate`` has been deprecated in DSL2.
* Operator ``spread`` has been deprecated in DSL2. Use :ref:`operator-combine` instead.

DSL2 Preview
------------

> * The ``nextflow.preview.dsl=2`` feature flag is no longer needed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
An early preview of DSL2 was available in 2020. Note that some of that early DSL2 syntax has since changed.

* The ``nextflow.preview.dsl=2`` (and ``nextflow.enable.dsl=1``) feature flags are no longer needed.
```
